---
layout: post
title:  "LTUE Day 2"
date:   2015-02-12 23:05:00
categories: writing conferences 
---
# LTUE - 2015 Feb 14 - Saturday

The last day of the conference. It's been good to be here and I only had time to be her ein the morning. Not many of the sessions interested me today, so I went to the only one that I wanted to see and then wrote for a while.

By far I think the best sessions I went to were the one on action scenes yesterday and the one on character and plot on Thursday. The rest were good, but I got the most out of those two. Could be that I have been struggling with plot in most all my material for years. I know the beginning and the ending, but the part in the middle has been a problem and so those two seminars have been more focused on what I need and thus _the best_.

After the one session today I sat down and worked some more on Rift Walker. Making better progress there, and based on those two sessions I have some ideas on how to move from the muddle of the middle.

## Making Your Own Martial Art

* Why make up your own martial art?
    - So you don't get called on it if you describe it poorly or apply it incorrectly
    - So you can respond to what is being thrown at you
        + Fighting in trees
        + Fighting in zero-gravivty
        + Fighting underwater
        + etc.

* Give reasons for why your character has learned this martial art

* What makes it different?

* Movies and inspiration
    - Deadliest Warrior - breaks down what is effective against what
    - 

* How to write a martial art?
    - Use immagination
    - Watch youTube and try to describe what you see
    - get out of your chair and act it out
    - the average person is not used to violence, it puts you into shock, and you have to step it up mentally

* Martial arts can help you know what different circumstances could be an advantage in certain situations

- Reading fight scenes can be dull if they take too long

- Most fights are usually very uneven
- Most fight only last a couple seconds at the most
- Staying out of a fight is the best option for anybody

- Strip out pronouns and adverb and just go to the fast words so it goes quickly

- Books with good fight scenes
    + Harry Dresden
