---
layout: post
title:  "LTUE Day 1"
date:   2015-02-12 23:05:00
categories: writing conferences 
---
# LTUE - 2015 Feb 12 - Thursday

[LTUE](http://goo.gl/7QjvE1) is a writing conference in Provo. Larry Corri has said, "LTUE is the best writing con in the country." [1](http://goo.gl/mBslKT) I agree and I've tried to go every year, but it doesn't happen nearly as often as I would like. I have a number of friends in the writing circles, many of whom were on panels, but I'm not about to do the name drop thing. It was nice to see them and I hope to be able to play a couple games with them when we are not in sessions.

So, without futher rambling....here are my notes from Day One of the conference.

## Everyday skills

- Go learn new stuff and try new things
- “Adventure Day” - spend a day learning or doing something. Get out of the house and find something to do or learn 

When you write, don't worry about writing everything in order. It's okay to skip around and you can write wherever you want as long as at the end it all lines up from A to Z.

"History doesn't repeat itself, it rhymes." - L. E. Modeset

## Writing Mystery

Michael Connely "The Poet" - Steve's favorite mystery

Mystery is not a genre but more of a style

Mysteries are usually written in first person

pacing usually much faster

Mystery doesn't usually threaten the main character while thriller does

There are more kinds of mystery stories than just murder mysteries

good mysteries should rotate around 'the only person' who could have solved this mystery

your family is, statically speaking, most likely to kill you

you need to reveal bits and pieces about the character's back story and the actual plot elements, interleaving them

how to do misdirection? people doing their jobs and making mistakes. Sherlock S03E01 opening is a great way of showing people speculating on what/how it happened

misdirection should be a logical choice based on the info characters have

## GMing: Keeping your players from wanting to kill you

Goblin Rogue in Pathfinder: Starts with +20 stealth

Gestalt characters with Rogue as one character class, three of them can take out all the dungeons up to giants module

Make the players suffer consequences for their choices

When starting a new system, don't have everybody look up the rules, just make a decision and live with it. move on and have one person look it up and adjust the next time.

Story is paramount! Mechanics just help it

Evoke 'Dire and Perilous' to make a boundary. Should be fun if you then plan on being flexible

## RPG Campaign Design

Don't script stuff with the players. 

When you design a campaign, you know the beginning and ending, but not a lot of the middle, but instead give them options that let them move from one to the other. 

Get them emotionally invested and let them have the freedom to do what they want. "Sandbox" them. Give them the ability to do whatever they want and still give them a good story.

"Roll initiative and tell me about your mother" - Peter J. Wacks

1. Start with "the world is going to end" (as the end)
2. then go with "how do the players get involved?"
3. Then ask how do you get them from the beginning to the end and provide hocks to get them there

The only difference between a game designer, published author is the medium. We are all story tellers and the important thing to do with is create relationships and interactions they enjoy

Ultimately you are creating a story for the people who are playing the campaign, not the people who are running it

Players need ways to blow off steam and resolve inter party conflicts

Players will figure out play before you are ready too. determine whether that derails you and decide what to do about it.

You are providing a way for character growth and character change

Give them a chance to go from the character at the beginning of the season to the end of the season

As the GM you are the "Game Operations Director" (GOD)

"Role not Roll". If you have to focus on rules and game mechanics, then you need to change things up

Problem people are not really problems, they are just telling you what part of the game they enjoy

The world still does stuff, even if they are are not. Raise the stakes the longer they dally

Dream sequence is a good way to stop dumb mistakes 

## Writing for RPGs

Fate/Dresden, there are a lot of people talking about it

Get adventure seeds and work on those to build something the players can do. Bob Defendi has stuff you can download to do that

## Plot leads to character: character leads to plot

What character loves, wants, fears, needs, hates can all drive plot and are necessary for character development 

Do characters have multiple identities and how to they react to how people react to the different identities

What roles does your character think of themselves having. When people challenge these identities then it causes conflict

There should be a story around the name your characters are given. Are they trying to live up to their name.

Plot is change

Motivation: What is the mantra of your character?

Flaws and virtues. These are situational

At the end of your planning you should not have a weak character of weak plot. they should both be strong.

What does your character absolutely know to be true? What happens when that is actually false?

What won't a character do to get what they want?

What does your character hate about themselves? Make it so they change so they don't hate it as much by the end of the book

What is the back story that drives your character? 

The past always informs the future and the present. What lessons has the character learned that informs their decisions?

What emotional patterns does your character feel driven to repeat?

Plot begins when change begins. This is also where your story begins.

Character must choose to change

What does the character do to get what they want?

Name three actions your character takes to get what they want. They should rarely work.

Plot is all about the failure of trying these three actions

Conflict is what happens when characters wants and needs oppose each other

Conflict also happens when the characters compete with each other for something they want

If you don't know what your character wants, then take away something they have, or put something they fear in there

Put in escalating events in the middle

A novel should be 75% process (try/fail)

Show the time it takes to change. (numerous sword lessons where the character is humiliated)

Create moments where people express truths about the world they have learned, or almost do. These are important emotional moments

Show don't tell. Show the character has changed, don't tell

What is the worst thing that can happen to your character and then do it, and then think of even worse things. Then figure out how your character will triumph over it (and don't make it cheep)

What is it in your character that will make this triumph possible?

Suffering: Make them suffer, but always make it somebody else fault

Betrayal by friend, body, nature,  people you love, self

Characters sometimes hurt others unconsciously or sabotage themselves

Rejection is part of moving to the future

Ignorance or over confidence also lead to failure

The ending is where circumstances are flipped from the beginning. What is lost or gained?

Characters growth is seen through the rising importance of the stakes as you move to the end

Plot needs climax. This is where the character wins or looses. They change in a concrete way.

"Find the book that only you can write"

