---
layout: post
title:  "LTUE Day 2"
date:   2015-02-12 23:05:00
categories: writing conferences 
---
# LTUE - 2015 Feb 12 - Thursday

[LTUE](http://goo.gl/7QjvE1) is a writing conference in Provo. Larry Corri has said, "LTUE is the best writing con in the country." [1](http://goo.gl/mBslKT)

Here are my notes from Day Two of the conference.

# LTUE - 2015 Feb 13 - Friday

## From Start to Finish 1: Ideas and Preparation

- Julie Wright: has a talk discussing how to fit writing in
- ShadowMountain press is an offshoot of Deseret Book

### Getting ideas
- Play to your strengths. 
- Role-playing
    - Good story telling and role playing go hand-in-hand
    - Role playing can also help you focus on what happens to your characters and how it feels
    - Interactive story telling with friends with a cool seed idea can help you generate ideas
- Ask yourself "What if?"

Writing is a process that is greater than the individual

Cut off all eternal stimulus (email, twitter, etc.)

Set aside time to focus on what you need and want to do

Creativity is just like any muscle. The more you use it, the more it gives you and the stronger it becomes

You can edit a badly written page, you cannot edit a blank page

## Your Workspace: Staying Inspired and effective

Make your space a place you want to go to. A welcoming place

One workspace is to have: 1 wall with a white board, 1 wall with sheet metal (for magnets), 1 wall with a cork board, 1 window

You don't want your workspace to interfere with your work


### 7 Minute Hurc.
- Basket for Garbage
- Basket for 
- Basket for 

Set a timer and say you are going to spend 7 minutes to just clean (or do whatever), and then say you are going to get back to writing back to where you are going to go

### What to do to get geared up to writing before you get to your space

Use mindless time (driving for example), plot your book. Then when you get to your space, you can sit down and write.

If you have problems in your space, you may need to break out of the box and change the place where you write, or you may need to resolve the issues in the box. Depends on what happens when you come back to the space over and over.

Always block out the time to write. At least you can say you what you are doing at that time. **It's a job!** and you need to have the time to do that job.

Sometimes you just.have.to.write.the.book. No matter how awful they are, because you can fix them later.

Squeeze it in whenever you can. It's really a motivation problem, not a time problem. Set appointments and work goals.

You need to say to yourself, **"I have work to do and it is valuable"**

Get a big poster and tell yourself "**Write Crap**"

You can always delete crap

Start writing, even if you are blocked, because that will eventually tell you what is keeping you blocked, and then it will bring you back to what you are working on. 

Sometimes you just need the time to let it out and then can move on

Editing may need it's own process and/or workspace.

You can motivate yourself to edit by telling yourself how much money you can make when you begin selling it it.

You may need to bargain with others in your family in order to get your writing time and space.

By taking it seriously yourself, others will take it seriously

**Write something short, make it really good and self publish it.**


## Novel in 90 Days by Johnny Worthen

He is three years into the published writer gig

Writer who became an author

Odds are not in your favor. "Never easier to be published, never been harder to be read"

* writer vs author
* amateur vs professional
* 

You can always fix a blank page

"The worst enemy to creativity is self-doubt"

You have to make yourself do it.

There are people excited to read your book!!

### Three steps to writing
1. Prewriting (30%)
2. Writing (50%)
3. Editing (20%)

### Tools

need three notebooks

1. main
2. pocket
3. nightstand

Get pens you love

+ pilot varsity disposal pens are great
+ jetstream stick bold roller ball

Computer

+ Backup often
+ Get words out
+ Scrivener is awesome
+ Scapple is useful
+ calendars are good too

### Prewriting (you have one month)

* Collect ideas, brainstorming
* Go learn new things
* Give yourself a day a week to do something new
    - cruise
    - play
    - tv
    - new books
    - etc

Know the rules for the genre you are writing

Know manuscript lengths

70K-120K is where you want to be

Make what you write about meaningful

Write down what you think your book is about (from a theme standpoint)

### Writing Structure

Know the ending before you start

A planned book gets written

Know beginning, middle and end

Character change is optional, but it is better to have it

Collect resources for use in writing

Make rules on how you are going to write

A good plan now is better than a perfect plan later

### Writing

Daily goals are not negotiable

1,666 Words/Day is what you have to do every day for a month.

Need a deadline

Find a good place to write

Set aside time every day to get it done

There is no such thing as writers block. Start writing no matter what.

Sometimes a writing group can be helpful, in other situations it may not

Make notes, plan on what you will do, then write, make notes on what to do, repeat. 

No editing until the book is done.

**Finish what you start. You do not start another project until the first project is done.**

### Editing

2 day recovery after the writing

3rd day, start editing

edit 5000 words a day (10,000+ is even better)

Let it rest for a month, and then read it again

After that, start another

"If you want to be a best selling author, write another book."

Writing another book is really the only power you have in this industry anyway.

Presentation is on his [website](http://www.johnnyworthen.com)

## From Start To Finish 2: Drafting And Revision

["Save the Cat"](http://goo.gl/7ZlIIX) - Book on screen writing structure and helpful for plotting

["Story: Style, Structure, Substance, and the Principles of Screenwriting"](http://goo.gl/xZjJK0) - McKeen

Don't be afraid to have a terrible first draft. In fact, it's expected.

Follow the rule of three. If somebody makes a suggestion and you are not sure about it, than three people have to tell you they have a problem with it before you make that change.

Julie Wright goes through book three times, one of which is out-loud

### Writing Groups

- Utah Writers
- Water Cooler
- Somebody that hates you

## How to Build an Action Plot

Power point of presentation will be [online](http://johndbrown.com)

Larry is teaching an online writing class

### Mech Runners
- Team, illegal arms dealers, mech suits
- Crime bosses and org
- warlord exploiting resource on planet
- harsh world with monsters
- orbitals but workers live on surface
- moral justification: everyone should be able to protect themselves

### 5 Man Band Trope
- Leader
- Lancer (trouble shooter)
- Nerd 
- Girl 
- Muscle 

Main Character is not leader

### Technique 1: Calculate Number of Events

2 Keys
- You are not building a plot
- Tents and castles are not the same

2K-4K is usually an event (we're going to use 3K)

figure out how long your novel is going to be and then figure how many number of events you need.

So...100K novel = 100K/3K = 33 Events

A novel is a guided experience

There is no 1 master plot

What are the elements you like about action stories

Make twists to the normal tropes to make stuff more interesting

Need an inciting event (must be an atrocity)

### Technique 2: MC MOTHR CAR

* **M**ain **c**haracter we can get behind
* Gets entagled with a MOTHR
    - a **m**ystery, **o**pportunity, **t**hreat, **h**eadship or **r**elationship
    - A huge obsticle underdog
* sets a **c**oncrete goal
* takes **a**ction
* **r**esolution

### Technique 3: The 3 Parts

* Trouble
    - Create anticipation
    - Main character we can get behind (interesting and sympathetic)
    - MOTHR
    - Why character can't or won't walk away (moral, physical, occupation)
    - Concrete goal
    - Surprise in some particularities

* Struggle
    - Reasons to worry and fear: actions unexpectedly thwarted, troubles increase (setback-recover pattern), antagonist in the game
    - Reasons to hope: plans, some actions succeed
    - Surprise in some of the particularities of motives, decisions, actions and results
    - Locked into final attempt (an insight & decision, some piece of information or a tool, an external pressure)

* Resolution
    - Preparation, approach, climax
    - Clear yes or no
    - Aftermath: understand what this means for character's life going forward
    - Surprise in some particularities of resolution

What are some things that the character would do after the inciting event? Come up with a good list and then select a couple

### Technique 4: What's Cool?

Come up with some cool stuff

Some tropes:

- Escapes
- Rescue captured
- zero-G fights
- Arms deal gone wrong
- Bot fight
- team gathering
- steal robot for arms dealer

### Technique 5: Specific MOTHR Patterns

Look at story patterns and steal some of them

### Technique 6: Play Both Sides

Figure out what the enemy would do

### Technique 7: Make it Hard

- Conflict
- Throw MC for a loop
- The seemingly killing blow (ability or desire)

## From Start To Finish 3: Publishing And Promotion

Branding yourself is important. You usually want to stick with a specific genre

Txt message service is a really great service to provide people so they can sign up for information on your book or future books.
